Bug 1689427 - Add a schema deploys FAQ with information about blocked schemas (#606)
mozilla/data-docs: src/concepts/pipeline/schemas.md

# Generated Schemas

<!-- toc -->

## Overview

Schemas describe the structure of ingested data. They are used in the pipeline to validate the types
and values of data, and to define a table schema in a data store. We use a repository of JSON
Schemas to sort incoming data into [`decoded` and `error` datasets][bq-datasets]. We also generate

> BigQuery table schemas nightly from the JSON Schemas. You may also be also interested in the

Reviewer: @chutten has smartly suggested "Business Days" for this terminology.

> BigQuery table schemas nightly from the JSON Schemas. You may also be also interested in the
> [`mozilla-pipeline-schemas` deploy dashboard][mps-deploys].

Reviewer 2: let's be more explicit about why you might want to look at the deploy dashboard.

```suggestion
BigQuery table schemas nightly from the JSON Schemas: you can see the current status of this job on the [`mozilla-pipeline-schemas` deploy dashboard][mps-deploys].
```

**Figure**: _An overview of generated schemas. Click on a node to navigate to the relevant
repository or documentation._

## Schema deploys FAQ

This section answers some basic questions about the schema deployment pipeline.

### How do I make changes to a schema?

> This is dependent on what application you are working on. If you are working on Firefox Telemetry or
> custom ping, you will often want to make changes to [`mozilla-pipeline-schemas`][mps]. If you are
> adding a new probe, then you don't have to do anything. Changes are automatically picked up by the
> [`probe-scraper`][probe-scraper] from the `histograms.json` and `scalars.yaml` files in
> `mozilla-central`. If you are working on Glean, then the probe-scraper will automatically pick up
> changes from the `metrics.yaml`.

Reviewer 2: Let's break this out a bit more and change the ordering slightly.

```suggestion
This is dependent on what application you are working on.

If you are working on Firefox Telemetry and are adding a new probe, then you don't have to do anything. Changes are automatically picked up by the [`probe-scraper`][probe-scraper] from the `histograms.json` and `scalars.yaml` files in `mozilla-central`. Non-probe changes (for example, modifications to the telemetry environment) will require you to make changes to [`mozilla-pipeline-schemas`][mps].

If you are working on an application using the [Glean SDK](../glean/glean.md), then the probe-scraper will automatically pick up changes from `metrics.yaml`.
```

### When will I see new changes to the schema?

Schema deploys occur daily around UTC+04 when new changes are found in the

> [`mozilla-schema-generator`][msg]. See the [`mozilla-pipeline-schemas` deploy][mps-deploys]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`generated-schemas branch of mozilla-pipeline-schemas`][https://github.com/mozilla-services/mozilla-pipeline-schemas/tree/generated-schemas]. This means that any changes merged after UTC+04 on Friday will not propagate until Monday UTC+04. See the [`mozilla-pipeline-schemas` deploy][mps-deploys]
```

> [`mozilla-schema-generator`][msg]. See the [`mozilla-pipeline-schemas` deploy][mps-deploys]

Author: Hmm, this is not quite right either. The new changes that feed the schema generation process would be found in the default branch of the respository.

> [`mozilla-schema-generator`][msg]. See the [`mozilla-pipeline-schemas` deploy][mps-deploys]

Author: Read it again and it does make sense, this is when the schema artifact is generated and deployed.

dashboard for up-to-date information on the most recent deploys.

### What does it mean when a schema deploy is blocked?

The schema deployment pipeline has a hard dependency on the [`probe-scraper`], a service that scours
repositories for new metrics to include in generated schemas. When the probe-scraper fails, it will
prevent the [`mozilla-schema-generator`][msg] from running. If there are new changes to the main
branch of `mozilla-pipeline-schemas`, then they will not be added to the `generated-schemas` branch
until the failure has been resolved. Similarly, new probes and pings in either Telemetry or Glean
will not be picked up until the `probe-scraper` failures are resolved.

If a new schema field is not registered in the schema repository before collection begins, it will
be available in the `additional_properties` field of the generated table. If a new schema for a ping
is not registered before collection begins, then it will be sorted into the error stream. Please

> file a bug or reach out in #data-help if you believe your data may be affected by blocked schema

Reviewer 2: Let's link to the existing resources on reporting bugs and reaching out -- feel free to move the link targets to the bottom to be consistent with the other resources.

```suggestion
[file a bug](../reporting_a_problem.md) or [reach out](../getting_help.md) if you believe your data may be affected by blocked schema
```
